<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter II</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01.xhtml" title="Chapter I"/><link rel="next" href="ch03.xhtml" title="Chapter III"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter II" epub:type="chapter" id="id70133936689600"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter II</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Digory and His Uncle</em></h3></div></div></div><p>It was so sudden, and so horribly unlike anything that had ever
happened to Digory even in a nightmare, that he let out a scream.
Instantly Uncle Andrew's hand was over his mouth.  "None of that!" he
hissed in Digory's ear.  "If you start making a noise your Mother'll
hear it.  And you know what a fright might do to her."</p><p>As Digory said afterwards, the horrible meanness of getting at a chap
in <span class="emphasis"><em>that</em></span> way, almost made him sick.  But of course he didn't scream
again.</p><p>"That's better," said Uncle Andrew.  "Perhaps you couldn't help it.  It
is a shock when you first see someone vanish.  Why, it gave even me a
turn when the guinea–pig did it last night."</p><p>"Was that when you yelled?" asked Digory.</p><p>"Oh, you heard <span class="emphasis"><em>that</em></span>, did you?  I hope you haven't been spying on me?"</p><p>"No, I haven't," said Digory indignantly.  "But what's happened to
Polly?"</p><p>"Congratulate me, my dear boy," said Uncle Andrew, rubbing his hands.
"My experiment has succeeded.  The little girl's gone—vanished—right
out of the world."</p><p>"What have you done to her?"</p><p>"Sent her to—well—to another place."</p><p>"What <span class="emphasis"><em>do</em></span> you mean?" asked Digory.</p><p>Uncle Andrew sat down and said, "Well, I'll tell you all about it.
Have you ever heard of old Mrs. Lefay?"</p><p>"Wasn't she a great–aunt or something?" said Digory.</p><p>"Not exactly," said Uncle Andrew.  "She was my god–mother.  That's her,
there, on the wall."</p><p>Digory looked and saw a faded photograph: it showed the face of an old
woman in a bonnet.  And he could now remember that he had once seen a
photo of the same face in an old drawer, at home, in the country.  He
had asked his Mother who it was and Mother had not seemed to want to
talk about the subject much.  It was not at all a nice face, Digory
thought, though of course with those early photographs one could never
really tell.</p><p>"Was there—wasn't there—something wrong about her, Uncle Andrew?" he
said.</p><p>"Well," said Uncle Andrew with a chuckle, "it depends what you call
<span class="emphasis"><em>wrong</em></span>.  People are so narrow minded.  She certainly got very queer in
later life.  Did very unwise things.  That was why they shut her up."</p><p>"In an asylum, do you mean?"</p><p>"Oh no, no, no," said Uncle Andrew in a shocked voice.  "Nothing of
that sort.  Only in prison."</p><p>"I say!" said Digory.  "What had she done?"</p><p>"Ah, poor woman," said Uncle Andrew.  "She had been very unwise.  There
were a good many different things.  We needn't go into all that.  She
was always very kind to me."</p><p>"But look here, what has all this got to do with Polly?  I do wish
you'd―"</p><p>"All in good time, my boy," said Uncle Andrew.  "They let old Mrs.
Lefay out before she died and I was one of the very few people whom she
would allow to see her in her last illness.  She had got to dislike
ordinary, ignorant people, you understand.  I do myself.  But she and I
were interested in the same sort of things.  It was only a few days
before her death that she told me to go to an old bureau in her house
and open a secret drawer and bring her a little box that I would find
there.  The moment I picked up that box I could tell by the pricking in
my fingers that I held some great secret in my hands.  She gave it to
me and made me promise that as soon as she was dead I would burn it
unopened, with certain ceremonies.  That promise I did not keep."</p><p>"Well then, it was jolly rotten of you," said Digory.</p><p>"Rotten?" said Uncle Andrew with a puzzled look.  "Oh, I see.  You mean
that little boys ought to keep their promises.  Very true: most right
and proper, I'm sure, and I'm very glad you have been taught to do it.
But of course you must understand that rules of that sort, however
excellent they may be for little boys—and servants—and women—and
even people in general, can't possibly be expected to apply to profound
students and great thinkers and sages.  No, Digory.  Men like me who
possess hidden wisdom, are freed from common rules just as we are cut
off from common pleasures.  Ours, my boy, is a high and lonely destiny."</p><p>As he said this he sighed and looked so grave and noble and mysterious
that for a second Digory really thought he was saying something rather
fine.  But then he remembered the ugly look he had seen on his Uncle's
face the moment before Polly had vanished: and all at once he saw
through Uncle Andrew's grand words.  "All it means," he said to
himself, "is that he thinks he can do anything he likes to get anything
he wants."</p><p>"Of course," said Uncle Andrew, "I didn't dare to open the box for a
long time, for I knew it might contain something highly dangerous.  For
my godmother was a very remarkable woman.  The truth is, she was one of
the last mortals in this country who had fairy blood in her.  (She said
there had been two others in her time.  One was a duchess and the other
was a charwoman.)  In fact, Digory, you are now talking to the last man
(possibly) who really had a fairy godmother.  There!  That'll be
something for you to remember when you are an old man yourself."</p><p>"I bet she was a bad fairy," thought Digory; and added out loud, "but
what about Polly?"</p><p>"How you do harp on that!" said Uncle Andrew.  "As if that was what
mattered.  My first task was of course to study the box itself.  It was
very ancient.  And I knew enough even then to know that it wasn't
Greek, or Old Egyptian, or Babylonian, or Hittite, or Chinese.  It was
older than any of those nations.  Ah—that was a great day when I at
last found out the truth.  The box was Atlantean; it came from the lost
island of Atlantis.  That meant it was centuries older than any of the
stone–age things they dig up in Europe.  And it wasn't a rough, crude
thing like them either.  For in the very dawn of time Atlantis was
already a great city with palaces and temples and learned men."</p><p>He paused for a moment as if he expected Digory to say something.  But
Digory was disliking his Uncle more every minute, so he said nothing.</p><p>"Meanwhile," continued Uncle Andrew, "I was learning a good deal in
other ways (it wouldn't be proper to explain them to a child) about
Magic in general.  That meant that I came to have a fair idea what sort
of things might be in the box.  By various tests I narrowed down the
possibilities.  I had to get to know some—well, some devilish queer
people, and go through some very disagreeable experiences.  That was
what turned my head grey.  One doesn't become a magician for nothing.
My health broke down in the end.  But I got better.  And at last I
actually <span class="emphasis"><em>knew</em></span>."</p><p>Although there was not really the least chance of anyone overhearing
them, he leaned forward and almost whispered as he said,</p><p>"The Atlantean box contained something that had been brought from
another world when our world was only just beginning."</p><p>"What?" asked Digory, who was now interested in spite of himself.</p><p>"Only dust," said Uncle Andrew.  "Fine, dry dust.  Nothing much to look
at.  Not much to show for a lifetime of toil, you might say.  Ah, but
when I looked at that dust (I took jolly good care not to touch it) and
thought that every grain had once been in another world—I don't mean
another planet, you know; they're part of our world and you could get
to them if you went far enough—but a really other world—another
Nature—another universe—somewhere you would never reach even if you
travelled through the space of this universe for ever and ever—a world
that could be reached only by Magic—well!"  Here Uncle Andrew rubbed
his hands till his knuckles crackled like fireworks.</p><p>"I knew," he went on, "that if only you could get it into the right
form, that dust would draw you back to the place it had come from.  But
the difficulty was to get it into the right form.  My earlier
experiments were all failures.  I tried them on guinea–pigs.  Some of
them only died.  Some exploded like little bombs―"</p><p>"It was a jolly cruel thing to do," said Digory who had once had a
guinea–pig of his own.</p><p>"How you do keep on getting off the point!" said Uncle Andrew.  "That's
what the creatures were there for.  I'd bought them myself.  Let me
see—where was I?  Ah yes.  At last I succeeded in making the Rings:
the yellow Rings.  But now a new difficulty arose.  I was pretty sure,
now, that a yellow Ring would send any creature that touched it into
the Other Place.  But what would be the good of that if I couldn't get
them back to tell me what they had found there?"</p><p>"And what about <span class="emphasis"><em>them</em></span>?" said Digory.  "A nice mess they'd be in if
they couldn't get back!"</p><p>"You will keep on looking at everything from the wrong point of view,"
said Uncle Andrew with a look of impatience.  "Can't you understand
that the thing is a great experiment?  The whole point of sending
anyone into the Other Place is that I want to find out what it's like."</p><p>"Well why didn't you go yourself then?"</p><p>Digory had hardly ever seen anyone look so surprised and offended as
his Uncle did at this simple question.  "Me?  Me?" he exclaimed.  "The
boy must be mad!  A man at my time of life, and in my state of health,
to risk the shock and the dangers of being flung suddenly into a
different universe?  I never heard anything so preposterous in my life!
Do you realise what you're saying?  Think what Another World means—you
might meet anything—anything."</p><p>"And I suppose you've sent Polly into it then," said Digory.  His
cheeks were flaming with anger now.  "And all I can say," he added,
"even if you are my Uncle—is that you've behaved like a coward,
sending a girl to a place you're afraid to go to yourself."</p><p>"Silence, Sir!" said Uncle Andrew, bringing his hand down on the table.
"I will not be talked to like that by a little, dirty, schoolboy.  You
don't understand.  I am the great scholar, the magician, the adept, who
is <span class="emphasis"><em>doing</em></span> the experiment.  Of course I need subjects to do it <span class="emphasis"><em>on</em></span>.
Bless my soul, you'll be telling me next that I ought to have asked the
guinea–pigs' permission before I used <span class="emphasis"><em>them</em></span>!  No great wisdom can be
reached without sacrifice.  But the idea of my going myself is
ridiculous.  It's like asking a general to fight as a common soldier.
Supposing I got killed, what would become of my life's work?"</p><p>"Oh, do stop jawing," said Digory.  "Are you going to bring Polly back?"</p><p>"I was going to tell you, when you so rudely interrupted me," said
Uncle Andrew, "that I did at last find out a way of doing the return
journey.  The Green Rings draw you back."</p><p>"But Polly hasn't got a Green Ring."</p><p>"No," said Uncle Andrew with a cruel smile.</p><p>"Then she can't get back," shouted Digory.  "And it's exactly the same
as if you'd murdered her."</p><p>"She can get back," said Uncle Andrew, "if someone else will go after
her, wearing a Yellow Ring himself and taking two Green Rings, one to
bring himself back and one to bring her back."</p><p>And now of course Digory saw the trap in which he was caught: and he
stared at Uncle Andrew, saying nothing, with his mouth wide open.  His
cheeks had gone very pale.</p><p>"I hope," said Uncle Andrew presently in a very high and mighty voice,
just as if he were a perfect Uncle who had given one a handsome tip and
some good advice, "I hope, Digory, you are not given to showing the
white feather.  I should be very sorry to think that anyone of our
family had not enough honour and chivalry to go to the aid of—er—a
lady in distress."</p><p>"Oh shut up!" said Digory.  "If you had any honour and all that, you'd
be going yourself.  But I know you won't.  All right.  I see I've got
to go.  But you <span class="emphasis"><em>are</em></span> a beast.  I suppose you planned the whole thing,
so that she'd go without knowing it and then I'd have to go after her."</p><p>"Of course," said Uncle Andrew with his hateful smile.</p><p>"Very well.  I'll go.  But there's one thing I jolly well mean to say
first.  I didn't believe in Magic till to–day.  I see now it's real.
Well if it is, I suppose all the old fairy tales are more or less true.
And you're simply a wicked, cruel magician like the ones in the
stories.  Well, I've never read a story in which people of that sort
weren't paid out in the end, and I bet you will be.  And serve you
right."</p><p>Of all the things Digory had said this was the first that really went
home.  Uncle Andrew started and there came over his face a look of such
horror that, beast though he was, you could almost feel sorry for him.
But a second later he smoothed it all away and said with a rather
forced laugh, "Well, well, I suppose that is a natural thing for a
child to think—brought up among women, as you have been.  Old wives'
tales, eh?  I don't think you need worry about my danger, Digory.
Wouldn't it be better to worry about the danger of your little friend?
She's been gone some time.  If there are any dangers Over There—well,
it would be a pity to arrive a moment too late."</p><p>"A lot <span class="emphasis"><em>you</em></span> care," said Digory fiercely.  "But I'm sick of this jaw.
What have I got to do?"</p><p>"You really must learn to control that temper of yours, my boy," said
Uncle Andrew coolly.  "Otherwise you'll grow up to be just like your
Aunt Letty.  Now.  Attend to me."</p><p>He got up, put on a pair of gloves, and walked over to the tray that
contained the Rings.</p><p>"They only work," he said, "if they're actually touching your skin.
Wearing gloves, I can pick them up—like this—and nothing happens.  If
you carried one in your pocket nothing would happen: but of course
you'd have to be careful not to put your hand in your pocket and touch
it by accident.  The moment you touch a Yellow Ring, you vanish out of
this world.  When you are in the Other Place I expect—of course this
hasn't been tested yet, but I <span class="emphasis"><em>expect</em></span>—that the moment you touch a
Green Ring you vanish out of that world and—I expect—re–appear in
this.  Now.  I take these two Greens and drop them into your right–hand
pocket.  Remember very carefully which pocket the Greens are in.  G for
Green and R for right.  G.R. you see: which are the first two letters
of Green.  One for you and one for the little girl.  And now you pick
up a Yellow one for yourself.  I should put it on—on your finger—if I
were you.  There'll be less chance of dropping it."</p><p>Digory had almost picked up the Yellow Ring when he suddenly checked
himself.</p><p>"Look here," he said.  "What about Mother?  Supposing she asks where I
am?"</p><p>"The sooner you go, the sooner you'll be back," said Uncle Andrew
cheerfully.</p><p>"But you don't really know whether I can get back."</p><p>Uncle Andrew shrugged his shoulders, walked across to the door,
unlocked it, threw it open, and said:</p><p>"Oh very well then.  Just as you please.  Go down and have your dinner.
Leave the little girl to be eaten by wild animals or drowned or starved
in Other World or lost there for good, if that's what you prefer.  It's
all one to me.  Perhaps before tea time you'd better drop in on Mrs.
Plummer and explain that she'll never see her daughter again; because
you were afraid to put on a ring."</p><p>"By gum," said Digory, "don't I just wish I was big enough to punch
your head!"</p><p>Then he buttoned up his coat, took a deep breath, and picked up the
Ring.  And he thought then, as he always thought afterwards too, that
he could not decently have done anything else.</p></section><footer/></body></html>