<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter VI</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch05.xhtml" title="Chapter V"/><link rel="next" href="ch07.xhtml" title="Chapter VII"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter VI" epub:type="chapter" id="id70133936850300"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter VI</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>The Beginning of Uncle Andrew's Troubles</em></h3></div></div></div><p>"Let go!  Let go!" screamed Polly.</p><p>"I'm not touching you!" said Digory.</p><p>Then their heads came out of the pool and, once more, the sunny
quietness of the Wood between the Worlds was all about them, and it
seemed richer and warmer and more peaceful than ever after the
staleness and ruin of the place they had just left.  I think that, if
they had been given the chance, they would again have forgotten who
they were and where they came from and would have lain down and enjoyed
themselves, half asleep, listening to the growing of the trees.  But
this time there was something that kept them as wide–awake as possible:
for as soon as they had got out on to the grass, they found that they
were not alone.  The Queen, or the Witch (whichever you like to call
her) had come up with them, holding on fast by Polly's hair.  That was
why Polly had been shouting out "Let go!"</p><p>This proved, by the way, another thing about the Rings which Uncle
Andrew hadn't told Digory because he didn't know it himself.  In order
to jump from world to world by using one of those Rings you don't need
to be wearing or touching it yourself; it is enough if you are touching
someone who is touching it.  In that way they work like a magnet; and
everyone knows that if you pick up a pin with a magnet, any other pin
which is touching the first pin will come too.</p><p>Now that you saw her in the wood, Queen Jadis looked different.  She
was much paler than she had been; so pale that hardly any of her beauty
was left.  And she was stooped and seemed to be finding it hard to
breathe, as if the air of that place stifled her.  Neither of the
children felt in the least afraid of her now.</p><p>"Let go!  Let go of my hair," said Polly.  "What do you mean by it?"</p><p>"Here!  Let go of her hair.  At once," said Digory.</p><p>They both turned and struggled with her.  They were stronger than she
and in a few seconds they had forced her to let go.  She reeled back,
panting, and there was a look of terror in her eyes.</p><p>"Quick, Digory!" said Polly.  "Change Rings and into the home pool."</p><p>"Help!  Help!  Mercy!" cried the Witch in a faint voice, staggering
after them.  "Take me with you.  You cannot mean to leave me in this
horrible place.  It is killing me."</p><p>"It's a reason of State," said Polly spitefully.  "Like when you killed
all those people in your own world.  Do be quick, Digory."  They had
put on their green Rings, but Digory said:</p><p>"Oh bother!  What are we to do?"  He couldn't help feeling a little
sorry for the Queen.</p><p>"Oh don't be such an ass," said Polly.  "Ten to one she's only
shamming.  Do come <span class="emphasis"><em>on</em></span>."  And then both children plunged into the home
pool.  "It's a good thing we made that mark," thought Polly.  But as
they jumped Digory felt that a large cold finger and thumb had caught
him by the ear.  And as they sank down and the confused shapes of our
own world began to appear, the grip of that finger and thumb grew
stronger.  The Witch was apparently recovering her strength.  Digory
struggled and kicked, but it was not of the least use.  In a moment
they found themselves in Uncle Andrew's study; and there was Uncle
Andrew himself, staring at the wonderful creature that Digory had
brought back from beyond the world.</p><p>And well he might stare.  Digory and Polly stared too.  There was no
doubt that the Witch had got over her faintness; and now that one saw
her in our own world, with ordinary things around her, she fairly took
one's breath away.  In Charn she had been alarming enough: in London,
she was terrifying.  For one thing, they had not realised till now how
very big she was.  "Hardly human" was what Digory thought when he
looked at her; and he may have been right, for some say there is
giantish blood in the royal family of Charn.  But even her height was
nothing compared with her beauty, her fierceness, and her wildness.
She looked ten times more alive than most of the people one meets in
London.  Uncle Andrew was bowing and rubbing his hands and looking, to
tell the truth, extremely frightened.  He seemed a little shrimp of a
creature beside the Witch.  And yet, as Polly said afterwards, there
was a sort of likeness between her face and his, something in the
expression.  It was the look that all wicked Magicians have, the "Mark"
which Jadis had said she could not find in Digory's face.  One good
thing about seeing the two together was that you would never again be
afraid of Uncle Andrew, any more than you'd be afraid of a worm after
you had met a rattlesnake or afraid of a cow after you had met a mad
bull.</p><p>"Pooh!" thought Digory to himself.  "<span class="emphasis"><em>Him</em></span> a Magician!  Not much.  Now
<span class="emphasis"><em>she's</em></span> the real thing."</p><p>Uncle Andrew kept on rubbing his hands and bowing.  He was trying to
say something very polite, but his mouth had gone all dry so that he
could not speak.  His "experiment" with the Rings, as he called it, was
turning out more successful than he liked: for though he had dabbled in
Magic for years he had always left all the dangers (as far as one can)
to other people.  Nothing at all like this had ever happened to him
before.</p><p>Then Jadis spoke; not very loud, but there was something in her voice
that made the whole room quiver.</p><p>"Where is the Magician who has called me into this world?"</p><p>"Ah—ah—Madam," gasped Uncle Andrew.  "I am most honoured―highly
gratified―a most unexpected pleasure―if only I had the
opportunity of making any preparations―I―I―"</p><p>"Where is the Magician, Fool?" said Jadis.</p><p>"I―I am, Madam.  I hope you will excuse any—er—liberty these
naughty children may have taken.  I assure you, there was no
intention―"</p><p>"You!" said the Queen in a still more terrible voice.  Then, in one
stride, she crossed the room, seized a great handful of Uncle Andrew's
grey hair and pulled his head back so that his face looked up into
hers.  Then she studied his face just as she had studied Digory's face
in the palace of Charn.  He blinked and licked his lips nervously all
the time.  At last she let him go; so suddenly that he reeled back
against the wall.</p><p>"I see," she said scornfully, "you are a Magician—of a sort.  Stand
up, dog, and don't sprawl there as if you were speaking to your equals.
How do you come to know Magic?  <span class="emphasis"><em>You</em></span> are not of royal blood, I'll
swear."</p><p>"Well—ah—not perhaps in the strict sense," stammered Uncle Andrew.
"Not exactly royal, Ma'am.  The Ketterleys are, however, a very old
family.  An old Dorsetshire family, Ma'am."</p><p>"Peace," said the Witch.  "I see what you are.  You are a little,
peddling Magician who works by rules and books.  There is no real Magic
in your blood and heart.  Your kind was made an end of in my world a
thousand years ago.  But here I shall allow you to be my servant."</p><p>"I should be most happy—delighted to be of any service—a p—pleasure,
I assure you."</p><p>"Peace!  You talk far too much.  Listen to your first task.  I see we
are in a large city.  Procure for me at once a chariot or a flying
carpet or a well–trained dragon, or whatever is usual for royal and
noble persons in your land.  Then bring me to places where I can get
clothes and jewels and slaves fit for my rank.  To–morrow I will begin
the conquest of the world."</p><p>"I—I—I'll go and order a cab at once," gasped Uncle Andrew.</p><p>"Stop," said the Witch, just as he reached the door.  "Do not dream of
treachery.  My eyes can see through walls and into the minds of men.
They will be on you wherever you go.  At the first sign of disobedience
I will lay such spells on you that anything you sit down on will feel
like red hot iron and whenever you lie in a bed there will be invisible
blocks of ice at your feet.  Now go."</p><p>The old man went out, looking like a dog with its tail between its legs.</p><p>The children were now afraid that Jadis would have something to say to
them about what had happened in the wood.  As it turned out, however,
she never mentioned it either then or afterwards.  I think (and Digory
thinks too) that her mind was of a sort which cannot remember that
quiet place at all, and however often you took her there and however
long you left her there, she would still know nothing about it.  Now
that she was left alone with the children, she took no notice of either
of them.  And that was like her too.  In Charn she had taken no notice
of Polly (till the very end) because Digory was the one she wanted to
make use of.  Now that she had Uncle Andrew, she took no notice of
Digory.  I expect most witches are like that.  They are not interested
in things or people unless they can use them; they are terribly
practical.  So there was silence in the room for a minute or two.  But
you could tell by the way Jadis tapped her foot on the floor that she
was growing impatient.</p><p>Presently she said, as if to herself, "What is the old fool doing?  I
should have brought a whip."  She stalked out of the room in pursuit of
Uncle Andrew without one glance at the children.</p><p>"Whew!" said Polly, letting out a long breath of relief.  "And now I
must get home.  It's frightfully late.  I shall catch it."</p><p>"Well do, do come back as soon as you can," said Digory.  "This is
simply ghastly, having her here.  We must make some sort of plan."</p><p>"That's up to your Uncle now," said Polly.  "It was he who started all
this messing about with Magic."</p><p>"All the same, you will come back, won't you?  Hang it all, you can't
leave me alone in a scrape like this."</p><p>"I shall go home by the tunnel," said Polly rather coldly.  "That'll be
the quickest way.  And if you want me to come back, hadn't you better
say you're sorry?"</p><p>"Sorry?" exclaimed Digory.  "Well, now, if that isn't just like a girl!
What have <span class="emphasis"><em>I</em></span> done?"</p><p>"Oh nothing of course," said Polly sarcastically.  "Only nearly screwed
my wrist off in that room with all the waxworks, like a cowardly bully.
Only struck the bell with the hammer, like a silly idiot.  Only turned
back in the wood so that she had time to catch hold of you before we
jumped into our own pool.  That's all."</p><p>"Oh," said Digory, very surprised.  "Well, all right, I'll say I'm
sorry.  And I really am sorry about what happened in the waxworks room.
There: I've said I'm sorry.  And now, do be decent and come back.  I
shall be in a frightful hole if you don't."</p><p>"I don't see what's going to happen to you.  It's Mr. Ketterley who's
going to sit on red hot chairs and have ice in his bed, isn't it?"</p><p>"It isn't that sort of thing," said Digory.  "What I'm bothered about
is Mother.  Suppose that creature went into her room.  She might
frighten her to death."</p><p>"Oh, I see," said Polly in rather a different voice.  "All right.
We'll call it Pax.  I'll come back—if I can.  But I must go now."  And
she crawled through the little door into the tunnel; and that dark
place among the rafters which had seemed so exciting and adventurous a
few hours ago, seemed quite tame and homely now.</p><p>We must now go back to Uncle Andrew.  His poor old heart went pit–a–pat
as he staggered down the attic stairs and he kept on dabbing at his
forehead with a handkerchief.  When he reached his bedroom, which was
on the floor below, he locked himself in.  And the very first thing he
did was to grope in his wardrobe for a bottle and a wine–glass which he
always kept hidden there where Aunt Letty could not find them.  He
poured himself out a glass–ful of some nasty, grown–up drink and drank
it off at one gulp.  Then he drew a deep breath.</p><p>"Upon my word," he said to himself.  "I'm dreadfully shaken.  Most
upsetting!  And at my time of life!"</p><p>He poured out a second glass and drank it too; then he began to change
his clothes.  You have never seen such clothes, but I can just remember
them.  He put on a very high, shiny, stiff collar of the sort that made
you hold your chin up all the time.  He put on a white waistcoat with a
pattern on it and arranged his gold watch chain across the front.  He
put on his best frock–coat, the one he kept for weddings and funerals.
He got out his best tall hat and polished it up.  There was a vase of
flowers (put there by Aunt Letty) on his dressing table; he took one
and put it in his button–hole.  He took a clean handkerchief (a lovely
one such as you couldn't buy today) out of the little left–hand drawer
and put a few drops of scent on it.  He took his eye–glass, with the
thick black ribbon, and screwed it into his eye: then he looked at
himself in the mirror.</p><p>Children have one kind of silliness, as you know, and grown–ups have
another kind.  At this moment Uncle Andrew was beginning to be silly in
a very grown–up way.  Now that the Witch was no longer in the same room
with him he was quickly forgetting how she had frightened him and
thinking more and more of her wonderful beauty.  He kept on saying to
himself, "A dem fine woman, sir, a dem fine woman.  A superb creature."
He had also somehow managed to forget that it was the children who had
got hold of this "superb creature": he felt as if he himself by his
Magic had called her out of unknown worlds.</p><p>"Andrew, my boy," he said to himself as he looked in the glass, "you're
a devilish well preserved fellow for your age.  A distinguished–looking
man, sir."</p><p>You see, the foolish old man was actually beginning to imagine the
Witch would fall in love with him.  The two drinks probably had
something to do with it, and so had his best clothes.  But he was, in
any case, as vain as a peacock; that was why he had become a Magician.</p><p>He unlocked the door, went downstairs, sent the housemaid out to fetch
a hansom (everyone had lots of servants in those days) and looked into
the drawing room.  There, as he expected, he found Aunt Letty.  She was
busily mending a mattress.  It lay on the floor near the window and she
was kneeling on it.</p><p>"Ah, Letitia my dear," said Uncle Andrew, "I—ah—have to go out.  Just
lend me five pounds or so, there's a good gel."  ("Gel" was the way he
pronounced girl.)</p><p>"No, Andrew dear," said Aunt Letty in her firm, quiet voice, without
looking up from her work.  "I've told you times without number that I
<span class="emphasis"><em>will not</em></span> lend you money."</p><p>"Now pray don't be troublesome, my dear gel," said Uncle Andrew.  "It's
most important.  You will put me in a deucedly awkward position if you
don't."</p><p>"Andrew," said Aunt Letty, looking him straight in the face, "I wonder
you are not ashamed to ask me for money."</p><p>There was a long, dull story of a grown–up kind behind these words.
All you need to know about it is that Uncle Andrew, what between
"managing dear Letty's business matters for her," and never doing any
work, and running up large bills for brandy and cigars (which Aunt
Letty had paid again and again) had made her a good deal poorer than
she had been thirty years ago.</p><p>"My dear gel," said Uncle Andrew, "you don't understand.  I shall have
some quite unexpected expenses to–day.  I have to do a little
entertaining.  Come now, don't be tiresome."</p><p>"And who, pray, are <span class="emphasis"><em>you</em></span> going to entertain, Andrew?" asked Aunt Letty.</p><p>"A—a most distinguished visitor has just arrived."</p><p>"Distinguished fiddlestick!" said Aunt Letty.  "There hasn't been a
ring at the bell for the last hour."</p><p>At that moment the door was suddenly flung open.  Aunt Letty looked
round and saw with amazement that an enormous woman, splendidly
dressed, with bare arms and flashing eyes, stood in the doorway.  It
was the Witch.</p></section><footer/></body></html>