<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter XI</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch10.xhtml" title="Chapter X"/><link rel="next" href="ch12.xhtml" title="Chapter XII"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter XI" epub:type="chapter" id="id70133937097080"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter XI</h1></div><div><h3 class="subtitle"><em>Digory and His Uncle Are Both in Trouble</em></h3></div></div></div><p>You may think the animals were very stupid not to see at once that
Uncle Andrew was the same kind of creature as the two children and the
Cabby.  But you must remember that the animals knew nothing about
clothes.  They thought that Polly's frock and Digory's Norfolk suit and
the Cabby's bowler hat were as much parts of them as their own fur and
feathers.  They wouldn't have known even that those three were all of
the same kind if they hadn't spoken to them and if Strawberry had not
seemed to think so.  And Uncle Andrew was a great deal taller than the
children and a good deal thinner than the Cabby.  He was all in black
except for his white waistcoat (not very white by now), and the great
grey mop of his hair (now very wild indeed) didn't look to them like
anything they had seen in the three other humans.  So it was only
natural that they should be puzzled.  Worst of all, he didn't seem to
be able to talk.</p><p>He had tried to.  When the Bulldog spoke to him (or, as he thought,
first snarled and then growled at him) he held out his shaking hand and
gasped "Good Doggie, then, poor old fellow."  But the beasts could not
understand him any more than he could understand them.  They didn't
hear any words: only a vague sizzling noise.  Perhaps it was just as
well they didn't, for no dog that I ever knew, least of all a Talking
Dog of Narnia, likes being called a Good Doggie then; any more than you
would like being called My Little Man.</p><p>Then Uncle Andrew dropped down in a dead faint.</p><p>"There!" said a Warthog, "it's only a tree.  I always thought so."
(Remember, they had never yet seen a faint or even a fall.)</p><p>The Bulldog, who had been sniffing Uncle Andrew all over, raised its
head and said, "It's an animal.  Certainly an animal.  And probably the
same kind as those other ones."</p><p>"I don't see that," said one of the Bears.  "An animal wouldn't just
roll over like that.  We're animals and we don't roll over.  We stand
up.  Like this."  He rose to his hind legs, took a step backward,
tripped over a low branch and fell flat on his back.</p><p>"The Third Joke, the Third Joke, the Third Joke!" said the Jackdaw in
great excitement.</p><p>"I still think it's a sort of tree," said the Warthog.</p><p>"If it's a tree," said the Other Bear, "there might be a bees' nest in
it."</p><p>"I'm sure it's not a tree," said the Badger.  "I had a sort of idea it
was trying to speak before it toppled over."</p><p>"That was only the wind in its branches," said the Warthog.</p><p>"You surely don't mean," said the Jackdaw to the Badger, "that you
think it's a <span class="emphasis"><em>talking</em></span> animal!  It didn't say any words."</p><p>"And yet, you know," said the Elephant (the She–Elephant, of course;
her husband, as you remember, had been called away by Aslan).  "And
yet, you know, it might be an animal of some kind.  Mightn't the
whitish lump at this end be a sort of face?  And couldn't those holes
be eyes and a mouth?  No nose, of course.  But then—ahem—one mustn't
be narrow–minded.  Very few of us have what could exactly be called a
Nose."  She squinted down the length of her own trunk with pardonable
pride.</p><p>"I object to that remark very strongly," said the Bulldog.</p><p>"The Elephant is quite right," said the Tapir.</p><p>"I tell you what!" said the Donkey brightly, "perhaps it's an animal
that can't talk but thinks it can."</p><p>"Can it be made to stand up?" said the Elephant thoughtfully.  She took
the limp form of Uncle Andrew gently in her trunk and set him up on
end: upside down, unfortunately, so that two half–sovereigns, three
half–crowns and a sixpence fell out of his pocket.  But it was no use.
Uncle Andrew merely collapsed again.</p><p>"There!" said several voices.  "It isn't an animal at all.  It's not
alive."</p><p>"I tell you, it is an animal," said the Bulldog.  "Smell it for
yourself."</p><p>"Smelling isn't everything," said the Elephant.</p><p>"Why," said the Bulldog, "if a fellow can't trust his nose, what is he
to trust?"</p><p>"Well, his brains perhaps," she replied mildly.</p><p>"I object to that remark very strongly," said the Bulldog.</p><p>"Well, we must do something about it," said the Elephant.  "Because it
may be the Neevil, and it must be shown to Aslan.  What do most of us
think?  Is it an animal or something of the tree kind."</p><p>"Tree!  Tree!" said a dozen voices.</p><p>"Very well," said the Elephant.  "Then, if it's a tree it wants to be
planted.  We must dig a hole."</p><p>The two Moles settled that part of the business pretty quickly.  There
was some dispute as to which way up Uncle Andrew ought to be put into
the hole, and he had a very narrow escape from being put in head
foremost.  Several animals said his legs must be his branches and
therefore the grey, fluffy thing (they meant his head) must be his
root.  But then others said that the forked end of him was the muddier
and that it spread out more, as roots ought to do.  So finally he was
planted right way up.  When they had patted down the earth it came up
above his knees.</p><p>"It looks dreadfully withered," said the Donkey.</p><p>"Of course it wants some watering," said the Elephant.  "I think I
<span class="emphasis"><em>might</em></span> say (meaning no offence to anyone present) that, perhaps, for
<span class="emphasis"><em>that</em></span> sort of work, my kind of nose―"</p><p>"I object to that remark very strongly," said the Bulldog.  But the
Elephant walked quietly to the river, filled her trunk with water, and
came back to attend to Uncle Andrew.  The sagacious animal went on
doing this till gallons of water had been squirted over him, and water
was running out of the skirts of his frock coat as if he had been for a
bath with all his clothes on.  In the end it revived him.  He awoke
from his faint.  What a wakening it was!  But we must leave him to
think over his wicked deeds (if he was likely to do anything so
sensible) and turn to more important things.</p><p>Strawberry trotted on with Digory on his back till the noise of the
other animals died away, and now the little group of Aslan and his
chosen councillors was quite close.  Digory knew that he couldn't
possibly break in on so solemn a meeting, but there was no need to do
so.  At a word from Aslan, the He–Elephant, the Ravens, and all the
rest of them drew aside.  Digory slipped off the horse and found
himself face to face with Aslan.  And Aslan was bigger and more
beautiful and more brightly golden and more terrible than he had
thought.  He dared not look into the great eyes.</p><p>"Please—Mr. Lion—Aslan—Sir?" said Digory, "could you—may I—please,
will you give me some magic fruit of this country to make Mother well?"</p><p>He had been desperately hoping that the Lion would say "Yes"; he had
been horribly afraid it might say "No."  But he was taken aback when it
did neither.</p><p>"This is the Boy," said Aslan, looking, not at Digory, but at his
councillors.  "This is the Boy who did it."</p><p>"Oh dear," thought Digory, "what have I done now?"</p><p>"Son of Adam," said the Lion.  "There is an evil witch abroad in my new
land of Narnia.  Tell these good Beasts how she came here."</p><p>A dozen different things that he might say flashed through Digory's
mind, but he had the sense to say nothing except the exact truth.</p><p>"I brought her, Aslan," he answered in a low voice.</p><p>"For what purpose?"</p><p>"I wanted to get her out of my own world back into her own.  I thought
I was taking her back to her own place."</p><p>"How came she to be in your world, Son of Adam?"</p><p>"By—by Magic."</p><p>The Lion said nothing and Digory knew that he had not told enough.</p><p>"It was my Uncle, Aslan," he said.  "He sent us out of our own world by
Magic Rings, at least I had to go because he sent Polly first, and then
we met the Witch in a place called Charn and she just held on to us
when―"</p><p>"You <span class="emphasis"><em>met</em></span> the Witch?" said Aslan in a low voice which had the threat
of a growl in it.</p><p>"She woke up," said Digory wretchedly.  And then, turning very white,
"I mean, I woke her.  Because I wanted to know what would happen if I
struck a bell.  Polly didn't want to.  It wasn't her fault.  I—I
fought her.  I know I shouldn't have.  I think I was a bit enchanted by
the writing under the bell."</p><p>"Do you?" asked Aslan; still speaking very low and deep.</p><p>"No," said Digory.  "I see now I wasn't.  I was only pretending."</p><p>There was a long pause.  And Digory was thinking all the time, "I've
spoiled everything.  There's no chance of getting anything for Mother
now."</p><p>When the Lion spoke again, it was not to Digory.</p><p>"You see, friends," he said, "that before the new, clean world I gave
you is seven hours old, a force of evil has already entered it; waked
and brought hither by this son of Adam."  The Beasts, even Strawberry,
all turned their eyes on Digory till he felt that he wished the ground
would swallow him up.  "But do not be cast down," said Aslan, still
speaking to the Beasts.  "Evil will come of that evil, but it is still
a long way off, and I will see to it that the worst falls upon myself.
In the meantime, let us take such order that for many hundred years yet
this shall be a merry land in a merry world.  And as Adam's race has
done the harm, Adam's race shall help to heal it.  Draw near, you other
two."</p><p>The last words were spoken to Polly and the Cabby who had now arrived.
Polly, all eyes and mouth, was staring at Aslan and holding the Cabby's
hand rather tightly.  The Cabby gave one glance at the Lion, and took
off his bowler hat: no one had yet seen him without it.  When it was
off, he looked younger and nicer, and more like a countryman and less
like a London cabman.</p><p>"Son," said Aslan to the Cabby.  "I have known you long.  Do you know
me?"</p><p>"Well, no, sir," said the Cabby.  "Leastways, not in an ordinary manner
of speaking.  Yet I feel somehow, if I may make so free, as 'ow we've
met before."</p><p>"It is well," said the Lion.  "You know better than you think you know,
and you shall live to know me better yet.  How does this land please
you?"</p><p>"It's a fair treat, sir," said the Cabby.</p><p>"Would you like to live here always?"</p><p>"Well, you see sir, I'm a married man," said the Cabby.  "If my wife
was here neither of us would ever want to go back to London, I reckon.
We're both country folks really."</p><p>Aslan threw up his shaggy head, opened his mouth, and uttered a long,
single note; not very loud, but full of power.  Polly's heart jumped in
her body when she heard it.  She felt sure that it was a call, and that
anyone who heard that call would want to obey it and (what's more)
would be able to obey it, however many worlds and ages lay between.
And so, though she was filled with wonder, she was not really
astonished or shocked when all of a sudden a young woman, with a kind,
honest face stepped out of nowhere and stood beside her.  Polly knew at
once that it was the Cabby's wife, fetched out of our world not by any
tiresome magic Rings, but quickly, simply, and sweetly as a bird flies
to its nest.  The young woman had apparently been in the middle of a
washing day, for she wore an apron, her sleeves were rolled up to the
elbow, and there were soapsuds on her hands.  If she had had time to
put on her good clothes (her best hat had imitation cherries on it) she
would have looked dreadful; as it was she looked rather nice.</p><p>Of course she thought she was dreaming.  That was why she didn't rush
across to her husband and ask him what on earth had happened to them
both.  But when she looked at the Lion she didn't feel quite so sure it
was a dream, yet for some reason she did not appear to be very
frightened.  Then she dropped a little half curtsey, as some country
girls still knew how to do in those days.  After that, she went and put
her hand in the Cabby's and stood there looking round her a little
shyly.</p><p>"My children," said Aslan, fixing his eyes on both of them, "you are to
be the first King and Queen of Narnia."</p><p>The Cabby opened his mouth in astonishment, and his wife turned very
red.</p><p>"You shall rule and name all these creatures, and do justice among
them, and protect them from their enemies when enemies arise.  And
enemies will arise, for there is an evil Witch in this world."</p><p>The Cabby swallowed hard two or three times and cleared his throat.</p><p>"Begging your pardon, sir," he said, "and thanking you very much I'm
sure (which my Missus does the same) but I ain't no sort of a chap for
a job like that.  I never 'ad much eddycation, you see."</p><p>"Well," said Aslan, "can you use a spade and a plough and raise food
out of the earth?"</p><p>"Yes, sir, I could do a bit of that sort of work: being brought up to
it, like."</p><p>"Can you rule these creatures kindly and fairly, remembering that they
are not slaves like the dumb beasts of the world you were born in but
Talking Beasts and free subjects?"</p><p>"I see that, sir," replied the Cabby.  "I'd try to do the square thing
by them all."</p><p>"And would you bring up your children and grandchildren to do the same?"</p><p>"It'd be up to me to try, sir.  I'd do my best: wouldn't we, Nellie?"</p><p>"And you wouldn't have favourites either among your own children or
among the other creatures or let any hold another under or use it
hardly?"</p><p>"I never could abide such goings on, sir, and that's the truth.  I'd
give 'em what for if I caught 'em at it," said the Cabby.  (All through
this conversation his voice was growing slower and richer.  More like
the country voice he must have had as a boy and less like the sharp,
quick voice of a cockney.)</p><p>"And if enemies came against the land (for enemies will arise) and
there was war, would you be the first in the charge and the last in the
retreat?"</p><p>"Well, sir," said the Cabby very slowly, "a chap don't exactly know
till he's been tried.  I dare say I might turn out ever such a soft
'un.  'Never did no fighting except with my fists.  I'd try—that is, I
'ope I'd try—to do my bit."</p><p>"Then," said Aslan, "you will have done all that a King should do.
Your coronation will be held presently.  And you and your children and
grandchildren shall be blessed, and some will be Kings of Narnia, and
others will be Kings of Archenland which lies yonder over the Southern
Mountains.  And you, little Daughter (here he turned to Polly) are
welcome.  Have you forgiven the Boy for the violence he did you in the
hall of images in the desolate palace of accursed Charn?"</p><p>"Yes, Aslan, we've made it up," said Polly.</p><p>"That is well," said Aslan.  "And now for the Boy himself."</p></section><footer/></body></html>